MSC2705: Animated thumbnails for media (#2705)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/2705-thumbnail-requirements.md

endpoint, allowing clients to specifically request an animated thumbnail.

## Proposal

A new query parameter, `animated`, is added to the `/thumbnail` endpoint. It has the following behaviour:

* When `true`: the server SHOULD return an animated thumbnail if possible/supported.
* When `false`: the server MUST NOT return an animated thumbnail.
* When not provided: the server SHOULD NOT return an animated thumbnail.

The default case is a relaxed version of the `false` behaviour to allow server owners to customize the
default behaviour when their users' clients do not support requesting animated thumbnails.

Clients SHOULD respect a user's preference to [reduce motion](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-reduced-motion)
and request non-animated thumbnails in these cases.

The content types which are able to be animated is left as an implementation detail. The following
SHOULD be supported at a minimum, however:

* `image/gif`
* `image/png` or `image/apng` ("APNG" format)
* `image/webp`

The returned content type for an animated thumbnail is additionally left as an implementation detail,

> though servers SHOULD use `image/webp` whenever possible.

Reviewer: personally, I'd  just leave the content type completely up to the implementation, but [shrug]

Author: yea, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4011 improves this significantly.

# MSC2705: Animated thumbnails

Some clients would like animated versions of media for thumbnail purposes. The use cases vary, however
the common ask is frequent enough to warrant an MSC.

## Proposal

By specifying `animated=true` in the query string for a `/thumbnail`, the server SHOULD return

> an animated thumbnail for the media if possible. When the parameter is `false` the server SHOULD NOT

Reviewer 2: What about allowing both `animated=1`, `animated=0` and `animated=true`, `animated=false`

Author: We don't do this anywhere else

Reviewer 2: Alright, sounds fair! 👍

> attempt to generate a thumbnail, as many implementation do today.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
attempt to generate an animated thumbnail, as many implementation do today.
```

> If the server supports the flag, it MUST support animating the following mimetypes:

Reviewer 2: What about animated webp's? Why MUST they support these animated mimetypes? Why not SHOULD, so that we have a list of animated types that exist?

Author: These are minimums.

Reviewer 2: Aaaaah, alright 👍

* `image/gif`

> * `image/png` (for animated PNGs - non-animated PNGs cannot be supported)

Reviewer 4: [Apparently, animated PNGs have their own mimetype according to the spec](https://wiki.mozilla.org/APNG_Specification#MIME_type). Should we prescribe both?

Author: ideally people would use that, but rarely does that actually happen.

Reviewer 4: I doubt anyone uses it tbh, but felt like I should point it out otherwise mozilla might be sad.

Other potential formats include videos and other image types - servers can support additional types
at their discretion.

If media cannot be animated, a static thumbnail should be returned instead. For example, if the client
requests `?animated=true` on a JPEG the server should not error but instead just return the downsized
JPEG as though the request was `?animated=false`.

> When thumbnailing, servers SHOULD return one of the following types:

Reviewer 2: Returning an animated webp might save quite some bandwidth, however the gif would have to be rendered into a webp. As thumbnailing output format seems to be different from original image format this seems still valid?

Author: Gifs are more widely supported.

Author: I've changed it to webp for now, as a recommendation.

* `image/jpeg` (or `image/jpg`)

> * `image/png` (non-animated)

Reviewer 2: There are animated png's, though

Author: Yup, but for support reasons servers shouldn't be spitting those out.

Reviewer 2: Actually animated png's are pretty widely supported. That being said, if the source is an animated png it makes sense that the media repo is allowed to spit out an animated png again? Or are we expected to cross-render as gif? That would sound like a bad idea as gif has a colour palette...

Author: Well, there's a reason it's a SHOULD and not a must. Servers can make their own determination for their intended use case, the spec just needs some consistency for clients to anticipate.

Reviewer 2: SHOULD sounds like a rather strong suggestion. For the non-animated jpegs and pngs that makes sense, but for animated things, it does less. So maybe a COULD for that?

Author: This section also isn't for animated types. We don't have a COULD keyword.

Reviewer 2: This section seems to be in general about what thumbnail types to return? The wording is a bit confusing to soru, sorry :/ If you put in one section a mixture of things that only apply to animated and things that apply to non-animated things, maybe add more sub-headers?

Author: Yea, it's a bit confusing having re-read it. Will take a look

Author: I've removed the section entirely, leaving it another MSC's problem to determine legal/minimum content types. Let's keep this MSC focused on animation only, 3 years later (sorry).
